endpoints/getting-started-grpc/README.md, before:

# Google Cloud Endpoints sample for Node.js

This sample demonstrates how to use Google Cloud Endpoints with Node.js.

For a complete walkthrough showing how to run this sample in different
environments, see the [Google Cloud Endpoints Quickstarts][docs_quickstart].

## Running locally

### Start a local server
```
$ node server.js -p 50051
```

### Run the client
```
$ node client.js -h localhost:50051
```

## Running on Google Cloud Platform
### Setup
Make sure you have [gcloud][gcloud] and [Node.js][nodejs] installed.

To update `gcloud`, use the `gcloud components update` command.

### Selecting an authentication method
1. Determine the appropriate API configuration file to use based on your authentication method.
- [JSON Web Tokens][jwt_io]: use `api_config.jwt.yaml`
- [API keys][gcp_api_key]: use `api_config.key.yaml`

2. Rename the `api_config.*.yaml` file you chose in Step 1 to `api_config.yaml`.

### Deploying to Endpoints
1. Install [protoc][protoc].

1. Compile the proto file using protoc.
```
$ protoc \
    --include_imports \
    --include_source_info \
    protos/helloworld.proto \
    --descriptor_set_out api.pb
```

1. In `api_config.yaml`, replace `MY_PROJECT_ID` and `SERVICE-ACCOUNT-ID` with your Project ID and your service account's email address respectively.

1. Deploy your service's configuration to Endpoints. Take note of your service's name once the deployment completes.
```
$ gcloud endpoints services deploy api.pb api_config.yaml
...

```

1. Build a Docker image for later use using the following command. Make sure to replace `[YOUR_PROJECT_ID]` with your Project ID.
```
$ gcloud builds submit --tag gcr.io/[YOUR_PROJECT_ID]/endpoints-example:1.0 .
...
Service Configuration [SERVICE_CONFIG_ID] uploaded for service [SERVICE_NAME]
```

### Running your service
#### Compute Engine
1. [Create][console_gce_create] a Compute Engine instance. Be sure to check **Allow HTTP traffic** and **Allow HTTPS traffic** when creating the instance.

1. Once your instance is created, take note of its IP address.

Note: this IP address is _ephemeral_ by default, and may change unexpectedly. If you plan to use this instance in the future, [reserve a static IP address][docs_gce_static_ip] instead.

1. SSH into your instance, and install Docker.
```
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install docker.io
```

1. Using the SSH connection to your instance, initialize the required Docker images in the order specified below. Replace `[YOUR_GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT]` and `[YOUR_SERVICE_NAME]` with your GCloud Project ID and your service's name respectively.
```
$ sudo docker run --detach --name=helloworld gcr.io/[YOUR_GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT]/endpoints-example:1.0
```

```
$ sudo docker run \
    --detach \
    --name=esp \
    --publish=80:9000 \
    --link=helloworld:helloworld \
    gcr.io/endpoints-release/endpoints-runtime:1 \
    --service=[YOUR_SERVICE_NAME] \
    --rollout_strategy=managed \
    --http2_port=9000 \
    --backend=grpc://helloworld:50051
```

1. On your local machine, use the client to test your Endpoints deployment. Replace `[YOUR_INSTANCE_IP_ADDRESS]` with your instance's external IP address, and `[YOUR_API_KEY]` with a [valid Google Cloud Platform API key][gcp_api_key].
```
$ node client.js -h [YOUR_INSTANCE_IP_ADDRESS]:80 -k [YOUR_API_KEY]
```

#### Container Engine
1. If you haven't already, install `kubectl`.
```
$ gcloud components install kubectl
```

1. [Create][console_gke_create] a container cluster with the default settings. Remember the cluster's name and zone, as you will need these later.


1. Configure `kubectl` to have access to the cluster. Replace `[YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME]` and `[YOUR_CLUSTER_ZONE]` with your cluster's name and zone respectively.
```
$ gcloud container clusters get-credentials [YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME] --zone [YOUR_CLUSTER_ZONE]
```

1. Edit the `container_engine.yaml` file, and replace `GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT` and `SERVICE_NAME` with your GCloud Project ID and your service's name.

1. Add a [Kubernetes service][docs_k8s_services] to the cluster you created. Note that Kubernetes services should not be confused with [Endpoints services][docs_endpoints_services].
```
$ kubectl create -f deployment.yaml
```

1. Get the external IP of your service. This may take a few minutes to be provisioned.
```
$ kubectl get service
```

### Testing your service
You can use the included client to test your Endpoints deployment.

1. Determine your service's IP address.

* If your service is hosted on Compute Engine, this will be your _instance's_ external IP address.

* If your service is hosted on Container Engine, this will be your _service's_ external IP address.

2. Run the client to connect to your service. When running the following commands, replace `[YOUR_IP_ADDRESS]` with the IP address you found in Step 1.

  * If you're using an API key, run the following command and replace `[YOUR_API_KEY]` with the appropriate [API key][gcp_api_key].
    ```
    $ node client.js -h [YOUR_CLUSTER_IP_ADDRESS]:80 -k [YOUR_API_KEY]
    ```

  * If you're using a [JSON Web Token][jwt_io], run the following command and replace `[YOUR_JWT_AUTHTOKEN]` with a valid JSON Web Token.
    ```
    $ node client.js -h [YOUR_CLUSTER_IP_ADDRESS]:80 -j [YOUR_JWT_AUTHTOKEN]
    ```

## gRPC HTTP/JSON Transcoding

In order to enable HTTP/JSON transcoding, use the `protos/http_helloworld.proto` definition and the `http_deployment.yaml` Kubernetes deployment.

1. In order to compile the gRPC definition with HTTP annotations, you need a copy of the [googleapis][googleapis] proto definitions.

```
$ GOOGLEAPIS=...
$ git clone https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis $GOOGLEAPIS
```

1. Compile the gRPC definition with HTTP annotations:

```
$ protoc \
    --proto_path=protos \
    --proto_path=$GOOGLEAPIS \
    --include_imports \
    --include_source_info \
    --descriptor_set_out api.pb \
    helloworld.proto
```

1. Deploy the API definition with HTTP annotations:

```
$ gcloud endpoints services deploy api.pb api_config.yaml

```

1. Deploy the Endpoints Proxy (ESP) with the HTTP 1.1 port enabled.
Make sure to update the content of `http_deployment.yaml` and replace the placeholder `[SERVICE_NAME]` and `[GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT]`.
```
$ kubectl apply -f http_deployment.yaml
```

1. Test the HTTP 1.1 Transcoding interface

```
$ curl "http://[SERVICE_IP_ADDRESS]/v1/sayHello?key=${API_KEY}&name=World"

{"message":"Hello World"}
```


## Cleanup
If you do not intend to use the resources you created for this tutorial in the future, delete your [VM instances][console_gce_instances] and/or [container clusters][console_gke_instances] to prevent additional charges.

## Troubleshooting
If you're having issues with this tutorial, here are some things to try:
- [Check][console_logs] your GCE/GKE instance's logs
- Make sure your Compute Engine instance's [firewall](https://console.cloud.google.com/networking/firewalls/list) permits TCP access to port 80

If those suggestions don't solve your problem, please [let us know][github_issues] or [submit a pull request][github_pulls].

[nodejs]: https://nodejs.org/
[gcloud]: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/
[jwt_io]: https://jwt.io
[protoc]: https://github.com/google/protobuf/#protocol-compiler-installation
[gcp_api_key]: https://support.google.com/cloud/answer/6158862?hl=en
[github_issues]: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/nodejs-docs-samples/issues
[github_pulls]: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/nodejs-docs-samples/pulls
[googleapis]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis
[console_gce_instances]: https://console.cloud.google.com/compute/instances
[console_gce_create]: https://console.cloud.google.com/compute/instancesAdd
[console_gke_instances]: https://console.cloud.google.com/kubernetes/list
[console_gke_create]: https://console.cloud.google.com/kubernetes/add
[console_logs]: https://console.cloud.google.com/logs/viewer
[docs_k8s_services]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/user-guide/services/
[docs_endpoints_services]: https://cloud.google.com/endpoints/docs/grpc
[docs_gce_static_ip]: https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/configure-ip-addresses#reserve_new_static
[docs_quickstart]: https://cloud.google.com/endpoints/docs/quickstarts

Commit message:

chore(grpc): migrate from grpc to @grpc/grpc-js in getting-started-grpc example (#4077)
* chore(deps): replace grpc with @grpc/grpc-js and @grpc/proto-loader

* refactor(server): migrate grpc server to @grpc/grpc-js and proto-loader

* refactor(client): migrate grpc client to @grpc/grpc-js and proto-loader

* chore(server): remove deprecated server.start() call after bindAsync

* docs(readme): improve client.js usage docs with JWT and API examples

* docs(readme): update get-id-token README.md reference

endpoints/getting-started-grpc/README.md, after:

# Google Cloud Endpoints sample for Node.js

This sample demonstrates how to use Google Cloud Endpoints with Node.js.

For a complete walkthrough showing how to run this sample in different
environments, see the [Google Cloud Endpoints Quickstarts][docs_quickstart].

## Running locally

### Start a local server
```
$ node server.js -p 50051
```

### Run the client
For running the client locally, you'll need either an API key or a JWT auth token:

#### Using a JWT token (recommended for local development)
You can generate a development-only JWT token using Google Cloud CLI:

```
$ gcloud auth print-identity-token
```
See [get-id-token#generic-dev](https://cloud.google.com/docs/authentication/get-id-token#generic-dev) for more info.

Then run the client using this token:
```
$ node client.js -h localhost:50051 -j YOUR_JWT_TOKEN
```

#### Using an API key
Alternatively, you can use an API key from your Google Cloud project:
```
$ node client.js -h localhost:50051 -k YOUR_API_KEY
```

You can create API keys in the [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/apis/credentials).

## Running on Google Cloud Platform
### Setup
Make sure you have [gcloud][gcloud] and [Node.js][nodejs] installed.

To update `gcloud`, use the `gcloud components update` command.

### Selecting an authentication method
1. Determine the appropriate API configuration file to use based on your authentication method.
- [JSON Web Tokens][jwt_io]: use `api_config.jwt.yaml`
- [API keys][gcp_api_key]: use `api_config.key.yaml`

2. Rename the `api_config.*.yaml` file you chose in Step 1 to `api_config.yaml`.

### Deploying to Endpoints
1. Install [protoc][protoc].

1. Compile the proto file using protoc.
```
$ protoc \
    --include_imports \
    --include_source_info \
    protos/helloworld.proto \
    --descriptor_set_out api.pb
```

1. In `api_config.yaml`, replace `MY_PROJECT_ID` and `SERVICE-ACCOUNT-ID` with your Project ID and your service account's email address respectively.

1. Deploy your service's configuration to Endpoints. Take note of your service's name once the deployment completes.
```
$ gcloud endpoints services deploy api.pb api_config.yaml
...

```

1. Build a Docker image for later use using the following command. Make sure to replace `[YOUR_PROJECT_ID]` with your Project ID.
```
$ gcloud builds submit --tag gcr.io/[YOUR_PROJECT_ID]/endpoints-example:1.0 .
...
Service Configuration [SERVICE_CONFIG_ID] uploaded for service [SERVICE_NAME]
```

### Running your service
#### Compute Engine
1. [Create][console_gce_create] a Compute Engine instance. Be sure to check **Allow HTTP traffic** and **Allow HTTPS traffic** when creating the instance.

1. Once your instance is created, take note of its IP address.

Note: this IP address is _ephemeral_ by default, and may change unexpectedly. If you plan to use this instance in the future, [reserve a static IP address][docs_gce_static_ip] instead.

1. SSH into your instance, and install Docker.
```
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install docker.io
```

1. Using the SSH connection to your instance, initialize the required Docker images in the order specified below. Replace `[YOUR_GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT]` and `[YOUR_SERVICE_NAME]` with your GCloud Project ID and your service's name respectively.
```
$ sudo docker run --detach --name=helloworld gcr.io/[YOUR_GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT]/endpoints-example:1.0
```

```
$ sudo docker run \
    --detach \
    --name=esp \
    --publish=80:9000 \
    --link=helloworld:helloworld \
    gcr.io/endpoints-release/endpoints-runtime:1 \
    --service=[YOUR_SERVICE_NAME] \
    --rollout_strategy=managed \
    --http2_port=9000 \
    --backend=grpc://helloworld:50051
```

1. On your local machine, use the client to test your Endpoints deployment. Replace `[YOUR_INSTANCE_IP_ADDRESS]` with your instance's external IP address, and `[YOUR_API_KEY]` with a [valid Google Cloud Platform API key][gcp_api_key].
```
$ node client.js -h [YOUR_INSTANCE_IP_ADDRESS]:80 -k [YOUR_API_KEY]
```

#### Container Engine
1. If you haven't already, install `kubectl`.
```
$ gcloud components install kubectl
```

1. [Create][console_gke_create] a container cluster with the default settings. Remember the cluster's name and zone, as you will need these later.


1. Configure `kubectl` to have access to the cluster. Replace `[YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME]` and `[YOUR_CLUSTER_ZONE]` with your cluster's name and zone respectively.
```
$ gcloud container clusters get-credentials [YOUR_CLUSTER_NAME] --zone [YOUR_CLUSTER_ZONE]
```

1. Edit the `container_engine.yaml` file, and replace `GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT` and `SERVICE_NAME` with your GCloud Project ID and your service's name.

1. Add a [Kubernetes service][docs_k8s_services] to the cluster you created. Note that Kubernetes services should not be confused with [Endpoints services][docs_endpoints_services].
```
$ kubectl create -f deployment.yaml
```

1. Get the external IP of your service. This may take a few minutes to be provisioned.
```
$ kubectl get service
```

### Testing your service
You can use the included client to test your Endpoints deployment.

1. Determine your service's IP address.

* If your service is hosted on Compute Engine, this will be your _instance's_ external IP address.

* If your service is hosted on Container Engine, this will be your _service's_ external IP address.

2. Run the client to connect to your service. When running the following commands, replace `[YOUR_IP_ADDRESS]` with the IP address you found in Step 1.

  * If you're using an API key, run the following command and replace `[YOUR_API_KEY]` with the appropriate [API key][gcp_api_key].
    ```
    $ node client.js -h [YOUR_CLUSTER_IP_ADDRESS]:80 -k [YOUR_API_KEY]
    ```

  * If you're using a [JSON Web Token][jwt_io], run the following command and replace `[YOUR_JWT_AUTHTOKEN]` with a valid JSON Web Token.
    ```
    $ node client.js -h [YOUR_CLUSTER_IP_ADDRESS]:80 -j [YOUR_JWT_AUTHTOKEN]
    ```

## gRPC HTTP/JSON Transcoding

In order to enable HTTP/JSON transcoding, use the `protos/http_helloworld.proto` definition and the `http_deployment.yaml` Kubernetes deployment.

1. In order to compile the gRPC definition with HTTP annotations, you need a copy of the [googleapis][googleapis] proto definitions.

```
$ GOOGLEAPIS=...
$ git clone https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis $GOOGLEAPIS
```

1. Compile the gRPC definition with HTTP annotations:

```
$ protoc \
    --proto_path=protos \
    --proto_path=$GOOGLEAPIS \
    --include_imports \
    --include_source_info \
    --descriptor_set_out api.pb \
    helloworld.proto
```

1. Deploy the API definition with HTTP annotations:

```
$ gcloud endpoints services deploy api.pb api_config.yaml

```

1. Deploy the Endpoints Proxy (ESP) with the HTTP 1.1 port enabled.
Make sure to update the content of `http_deployment.yaml` and replace the placeholder `[SERVICE_NAME]` and `[GOOGLE_CLOUD_PROJECT]`.
```
$ kubectl apply -f http_deployment.yaml
```

1. Test the HTTP 1.1 Transcoding interface

```
$ curl "http://[SERVICE_IP_ADDRESS]/v1/sayHello?key=${API_KEY}&name=World"

{"message":"Hello World"}
```


## Cleanup
If you do not intend to use the resources you created for this tutorial in the future, delete your [VM instances][console_gce_instances] and/or [container clusters][console_gke_instances] to prevent additional charges.

## Troubleshooting
If you're having issues with this tutorial, here are some things to try:
- [Check][console_logs] your GCE/GKE instance's logs
- Make sure your Compute Engine instance's [firewall](https://console.cloud.google.com/networking/firewalls/list) permits TCP access to port 80

If those suggestions don't solve your problem, please [let us know][github_issues] or [submit a pull request][github_pulls].

[nodejs]: https://nodejs.org/
[gcloud]: https://cloud.google.com/sdk/gcloud/
[jwt_io]: https://jwt.io
[protoc]: https://github.com/google/protobuf/#protocol-compiler-installation
[gcp_api_key]: https://support.google.com/cloud/answer/6158862?hl=en
[github_issues]: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/nodejs-docs-samples/issues
[github_pulls]: https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/nodejs-docs-samples/pulls
[googleapis]: https://github.com/googleapis/googleapis
[console_gce_instances]: https://console.cloud.google.com/compute/instances
[console_gce_create]: https://console.cloud.google.com/compute/instancesAdd
[console_gke_instances]: https://console.cloud.google.com/kubernetes/list
[console_gke_create]: https://console.cloud.google.com/kubernetes/add
[console_logs]: https://console.cloud.google.com/logs/viewer
[docs_k8s_services]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/user-guide/services/
[docs_endpoints_services]: https://cloud.google.com/endpoints/docs/grpc
[docs_gce_static_ip]: https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/configure-ip-addresses#reserve_new_static
[docs_quickstart]: https://cloud.google.com/endpoints/docs/quickstarts
